with the impending release of Disney's
live-action version of Mulan one
question looms largest on the Internet
will there be Szechuan sauce 1988 they
had this promotion for the Disney film
Mulan where they were they they created
a new sauce for the McNuggets called
Szechuan sauce and it's delicious with
that one clip from Rick and Morty
McDonald's special limited-edition
nugget sauce released to tie in with the
original Mulan movie became the sauce
that was heard around the world and
after that clip the company did do a
limited re-release at the fabled
Szechuan sauce hosing some badly behaved
Rick and Morty fans to Loki riot but now
here we are on the cusp of a new Milan
movie and a second chance for the world
to experience that liquid gold yet again
make it happen McDonald's hashtag bring
back the sauce I want to try this stuff
and I refused to drop 14 grand in the
Szechuan sauce eBay black market
hello Internet welcome to film theory
the show where our reflection shows the
intense over analysis and mild anxiety
it's no secret that I've been excited
about the live-action Disney remakes
each and every time they come out and
sure sometimes you can't really recreate
the magic of a beloved childhood classic
no matter how much Beyonce you rub on to
it but if my hopes are high for one of
these remakes honestly they're probably
highest for Mulan for one Mulan isn't
gonna have to revolve around CGI animals
that somehow feel less realistic than
the two-dimensional drawings that
they're based on but I also feel like
Mulan is the Forgotten youngest child
and Disney's really strong stretch of
movies from the 90s
Oh Mulan you made the soccer team good
for you that's nice meanwhile your older
siblings Aladdin Lion King and Beauty
and the Beast all got full scholarships
were named homecoming queen and got the
Oscar for Best Original Song but you
know we're proud of you too though we
love you all equally the original Mulan
though deserves some respect I mean
nobody doesn't sing along when I'll make
a man out of you comes on at karaoke and
Mu Shu belongs in the Canon of great
animated sidekicks I mean when you think
about it isn't Mu Shu basically just
donkey from Shrek in dragon form all the
way down to Eddie Murphy hold on a
second a movie about a protagonist
reluctantly going on a journey to save
their home hiding their true identity
from their love interest all while
accompanied by an Eddie Murphy voiced
sidekick is Mulan actually the first
Shrek movie no no it's not at any rate
Mulan also gives us one of the best
action sequences ever from a Disney
movie
when Mulan fires a rocket at a mountain
to create an avalanche and bury the
invading Huns who historically would
have been Mongols because of history but
who's keeping track of that stuff it's a
cool piece of Disney meeting MacGyver
and it's one of the most epic moments in
all of Disney films it's also one of the
deadliest moments that we've seen in a
Disney film as we calculate a no pass
theory but now that we're on the cusp of
this new movie it makes the theorists
and me wonder how realistic was that
scene could you really cause an
avalanche with a giant roman candle
could Mulan have done so hundreds of
years ago when the film took place it's
gonna take researching a number of
questions from history and physics to
get to the bottom of it so let's get
down to business
and we'll make some puns to figure out
just how realistic this whole scene is
we've got to answer a number of initial
questions question number one in a small
explosion create an avalanche we've all
heard that if you're mountain climbing
you shouldn't scream for fear of causing
an avalanche but that's not really a
thing no joke it's a complete myth
sure your voice may be powerful yeah it
may echo off of the mountaintops maybe
but your voice alone simply doesn't have
enough force scientifically speaking the
pressure amplitudes caused by shouting
are about two orders of magnitude
smaller than the amount it takes to set
an avalanche off which then merits the
question what can cause an avalanche
well avalanche is a lot more complex
than just a bit of snow sliding down
into more bits of snow believe it or not
there are actually three different types
of avalanches dry snow wet snow and slab
for each one it's as much about having
the right conditions for an avalanche as
anything else you need a steep mountain
slope you need snow cover a weak layer
in that snow cover and finally a trigger
now a dry snow avalanche or powder
avalanche occurs after fresh snowfall
these tend to travel very fast up to a
hundred and ninety miles an hour that's
about 300 kilometres an hour these
things start all light and fluffy and
are very visually beautiful beneath that
misty powder cloud is a rushing massive
snow that when it comes to a stop is
about four times denser than when it
started meanwhile a wet snow avalanche
is caused by the snow strength
decreasing from either melting or
rainfall because everything is so moist
in the snow there's no pillowy cloud
with this one making everything look
much more like a landslide it also makes
wet snow avalanches much slower about 10
to 20 miles an hour or 15 to 30
kilometers an hour but both of these two
types of avalanches pale in comparison
to the third type slab avalanches which
account for about 90% of all Avalanche
related deaths basically you have
yourself a solid slab of snow resting on
a less stable layer of snow underneath
it and when that weak layer fails the
top slab slides taking everything with
it and when I say taking everything I
mean it a typical slab is about half the
size of a football field and about 1 or
2 feet D 30 to 60 centimeters they start
off slow but they can quickly accelerate
to around 80
miles an hour or 128 kilometers an hour
in just a few seconds so basically a
giant sheet of snow and ice heads
straight down a mountain at 80 miles per
hour with all that being said the
Avalanche that we see in Moulin is
absolutely a slab style avalanche so
what can trigger an avalanche well it
can really be any number of things from
earthquakes to wind to snowmobiles if it
can disturb the snowpack enough to
loosen that top layer of snow gravity is
just gonna do the rest assuming that all
the other conditions are right put an
exploding rocket act as a trigger well
yeah they do frequently small controlled
explosions are often used to cause small
periodic avalanches in order to reduce
the likelihood of giant catastrophic
avalanches so much like controlled burns
are vital to preventing huge forest
fires little man-made avalanches keep
skiers from becoming human popsicles the
explosion that we see when Milan's
projectile hits the top of the mountain
doesn't have to be gigantic
it just has to disrupt the snow enough
to cause a snowball effect so it's safe
to say that the answer to question one
is a yes question number two can an
avalanche actually take out an army the
short answer is yes and we have history
to prove it during World War one
austro-hungarian troops built barracks
and fortifications in the Italian Alps
settling them at high altitudes in the
hopes of being out of range of mortar
fire but as it turns out mortars
shouldn't have been the biggest of their
concerns as the barracks were buried by
a series of avalanches in December of
1916 with the largest of those coming on
what is now known as white Friday these
avalanches brought massive casualties
both to the austro-hungarians as well as
the Italians with total estimates of
life loss that day anywhere between two
thousand and ten thousand people so
avalanches definitely have the power to
decimate an army but these troops were
mostly standing still in Milan xiang
yu's army is charging on horseback
toward the Chinese when they're swept up
by the Avalanche so what the Calvary
charge have simply outrun the Avalanche
if you're paying attention you know the
answer is no at their fastest most
Calvary charges top out at 10 meters a
second which translates to about 22
miles per hour short horses can go
faster than that but given that be not
technically hun army is charging through
the snow it's probably safer to say that
they weren't going faster than 22 miles
an hour avalanches on the other hand can
easily reach speeds of 80 plus miles an
hour so turning around or getting out of
the way isn't going to be in the car
for the Huns the avalanche that we see
in mulan is gonna catch up to those
troops and it's likely gonna devastate
their entire force so the answer to
question number two we can definitely
say again that it's realistic but okay
okay avalanches are dangerous and
they're not that hard to cause big whoop
says you the disgruntled viewer who just
tuned in for the discussion of Chinese
rocket artillery the real question is
number three
whether Mulan could have hit the summit
of the mountain with the rocket to cause
that avalanche in the first place this
is the question that gets the most
complicated because it requires us to
make some decisions about the world in
which Mulan exists for one thing when
exactly is Mulan set the kind of
weaponry she would abused is highly
dependent on the era but the movie gives
us some mixed messages the original
Legend of Hua Mulan placed her life in
the fifth or sixth century AD during the
Northern Wei period of Chinese history
but the Huns weren't around at this
point at all in history to make things
even more confusing the depiction of the
Great Wall of China and Mulan looks like
the parts of the wall that were built
during the Ming Dynasty from the 14th to
the 17th century AD but the kicker for
me here is the existence of the imperial
city in the first place which was also
built during that Ming Dynasty so for
the sake of argument let's just say that
Disney's version of the Mulan story
takes place in a later medieval China no
earlier than the 14th century in that
case the rocket that we see mulan fire
at the mountain would have been
historically accurate for that time
period the first recorded use of rocket
weapons by the Chinese occurred against
the Mongols at the Battle of pike hang
in 1232 ad artillery in this battle were
known as fire arrows which were
basically small explosives attached to
arrows that help them fly straight
before they exploded on impact basically
they were the equivalent of bottle
rockets but what we see in the battle
scene of Mulan is something much larger
and a whole lot more complex the most
likely inspiration from Milan's rocket
launcher was a device called V and
apologies for butchering the
pronunciation for long Shu shway which
translates to fire dragon issuing from
the water the who along Shu shway was
one of history's first examples of a
multistage rocket where an initial fuse
was lit to propel small rockets which
would then in turn fire the larger
rocket wooden the fuses burned out it's
pretty darn sophisticated technology
given that the world was still several
centuries away from electricity and
indoor plumbing an estimated range of
the whole long swoosh we was a pretty
impressive 1,800 yards slightly over
mile so it's definitely a long-range
weapon but is it long-range enough to
hit the mountain top that Mulan is
aiming for to answer that we need to
determine where exactly in the world we
are and that's where things start to get
a little messy
everyone in Milan refers to the battle
site as the tongue shall pass which
would make things easy
if tongue shall pass actually existed
nor is there a super obvious mountain
pass between the Great Wall and Beijing
that would be the real world stand-in
for tongues shall pass however Disney's
production team did travel to several
places in China while researching for
the film and one of those locations was
Luo yang very close to who Lao passed
near mount Song
this is the likeliest culprit of our
inspiration for Tung Shao pass because
low pass is the location of a few
different battles from Chinese history
including one concurrent with the
original Hua Mulan story so let's assume
that the real-life version of the
mountain pass we see in Wulin is a round
mount song which at its peak has a
height of 4900 61 feet or 15 12 meters
as we just mentioned the Wolong shoosh
we had an approximate range of 1,800
yards which is 5,400 feet or 1645 meters
now granted Mulan isn't firing the
rocket straight up and Pythagoras would
be quick to tell us that the measurement
that we're looking for is the hypotenuse
of a right triangle that takes both the
lateral and vertical distance into
account so if we take a look at the
angle at which Mulan is launching the
rocket we get a launch angle of right
around 45 degrees that means that if the
total range of the rocket is 5,400 feet
the rocket could travel both a
horizontal distance and a vertical
distance of about 3818 feet or 1164
meters that isn't quite high enough to
hit the summit of mount songs from
ground level but remember who LAN isn't
at the base of the mountain she's
already pretty close to the top of the
cliff as long as they're already about a
thousand feet up the mountain which
appears likely based on the treacherous
steep cliffs below the Mullins rocket
absolutely has the range it needs to hit
the sweet spot and cause that Avalanche
so on today's episode of Mythbusters
film theory we can say that Mullins
artillery is sufficient to cause a
potential avalanche at it's historically
accurate for the Chinese military to be
using that device and that the outcome
of the Avalanche would be just as
devastating as we see in the film it
requires some estimation but the scene
strikes me as plausible all the way
through as long as Mulan is just a crazy
good sniper but here's the
real twist of today's episode my friends
even if Mulan didn't hit that mountain
with the rocket there's still a good
chance that the not Huns were gonna die
in the Naville anch anyway you see
National Geographic estimates that 90%
of avalanche disasters are triggered by
humans whether they be climbing skiing
or snowmobiling and if those are enough
to cause an avalanche how about a
cavalry charge made up of hundreds of
stampeding horses I mean we just talked
about the various triggers and Avalanche
needs including small explosions
disruptions in the snow or earthquakes
and something about hundreds of horses
thundering down a mountain all at the
same time suggests that there might just
be enough force there to cause a chain
reaction
provided the other conditions that we
mentioned before are there's no cover
steep slopes and weakened layers in the
snowpack it doesn't really matter if the
trigger was an exploding rocket or a
charging army Milan made a great shot
for sure but Shan use Army was doomed as
soon as they decided to go through the
mountains in the first place
the quickest way to the Emperor is
through that pass but hey that's just a
theory Oh film theory now if you'll
excuse me since Mulan just got delayed I
guess I have to settle with rocking out
to some I'll make a man out of you
mm-hmm oh you're wondering what ear buds
I'm using that are giving me such
tremendous sound well glad you asked
these are actually my new recon wireless
earbuds our sponsor for today's episode
buying a pair of recon headphones is
serious big brain time not only are they
half the price of any other premium
wireless ear but out there which gotta
be honest is nice for a guy who is
constantly losing small important
objects now that they're being tossed
around the house and restaurants and
literally everywhere by a toddler they
also deliver a great depth of sound with
their latest the everyday e25 having a
lot more base again nice when the
aforementioned toddler wants to listen
to baby shark for like the 17th time in
a row and you just want to listen to
some daddy music for a change just for
like three minutes well you pop in your
break on wireless earbuds and finally
listen to something that is slightly
more melodically complex sorry can you
tell that I'm speaking from personal
experience right now please can someone
relate to this please tell me that I'm
not alone anyway not only is Ray con
helping me save money and my sanity
they're actually a shape that fits and
stays in your ears able to stay in their
regardless of whether your walk
you're running or you know contorting
your body around as your toddler spider
monkeys around your head they're super
easy to pair to but more importantly
they stay paired which is like the most
obnoxious thing ever for other Bluetooth
devices like why are you dropping the
connection nothing has changed and I'm
in the middle of my song they also come
in a lot of great colors and they give
you six hours of playtime per charge so
if you're looking for an excellent set
of wireless earbuds that aren't gonna
set you back worse than your student
loans and you know you are since most
phones don't have an audio jack anymore
Reagan is the way to go plus if you
click the link in the description bye
recon comm slash film theorists you get
15% off your order making that low price
even better that's by rake on.com slash
film theorists just click the link in
the description it's easier than trying
to spell out film theorists fil M th EO
RI STS it's even hard to say anyway the
long and short of it is that there are
mini earbuds delivering some huge sound
and even bigger savings so click that
link down in the description below by
rakin comm slash film theorists to get
15% off your order and in the meantime
remember that's just a theory film
theory
and cut